<h1>운영체제</h1>

2주차_24.09.16.(월)

<h3>I/O Structure</h3>

- What is I/O
    - Input and Output
    - Data transfer in between devices and memory/local buffer
    - Devices include keyboard, monitor, mouse, disk, etc.
- Device Controller
    - A hardware which is connected to the common bus
    - One or more devices are connected to a device controller
    - maintains some local buffer storage and a set of special-purpose registers
    - is responsible for moving the data between the peripheral devices and its local buffer storage
- Device Driver
    - A operating system has a device driver for each device controller
    - understands the device controller
    - provides a uniform interface for the device to the rest of the OS
- To start an I/O operation
    - The device driver sets the appropriate registers within the device controlelr
    - The device controlelr examines the contents
    - The device controller starts the transfer of data from the device to its local buffer
    - On Completion, the device controller informs the device driver via interrupt.
    - The device driver returns control to the OS
    - OS read the data

- Synchronous I/O
    - After I/O starts, control returns to user program only upon I/O completion.
    - Wait instruction idles the CPU until the next interrupt
- Asynchronous I/O
    - After I/O starts, control returns to user program without waiting for I/O completion.

<h3>Two I/O Methods</h3>

- User Process uses Synchronous I/O
- Operating System uses Asynchronous I/O
    - 어떤 의미일지 생각해보세요
- Synchronous I/O
    - I/O 시작되는 동안 멈춰있고
- Asynchronous I/O
    - I/O 진행되는 사이에 다른 일을 동시에 한다

<h3>Direct Memory Acess (DMA)</h3>

- used for high-speed I/O devices
    - able to transmit information at close to memory speeds.
- Device controller transfers blocks of data from buffer storage directly to main memory to main memory without CPU intervention.
- Only interrupt is generated per block, rather than one interrupt per byte.
    - improves the performance of DMA.

<h3>Storage Structure</h3>

- Main memory - only large storage media that the CPU(운영체제/프로그램이 동작하는 곳) can access directly. (outside CPU)
- Secondary storage - extension of main memory that provides large nonvolatile storage capacity.
    - Magnetic disk are used for the secondary storage
- Magnetic disks - rigid metal or glass platters covered with magnetic recording material
    - Disk surface is logically divied into tracks, which are subdivied into sectors.
    - The disk controller determines the logical interaction between the device and the computer.

<h3>Storage Hierarchy</h3>

- Storage systems organized in hierarchy. 계층구조
    - Speed
    - Cost
    - Volatility 휘발성 .. 전원 끄면 사라지냐 아니냐

- Caching (임시 저장) - copying information into faster storage system; main memory can be viewed as a last cache for secondary storage.

<h3>Storage-Device Hierarchy</h3>

- register/cache - cpu 안의 저장 공간
- memory
    - Expensive
    - Fast
    - Small
    - Volatile
- solid-state disk (SSD)
- magnetic disk (하드디스크)
- optical disk
- magnetic tapes
    - Inexpensive
    - Slow
    - Large
    - Non-volatile

<h3>Caching</h3>

- Important principle, performed at many levels in a computer (in hardware, operating system, software)
- Information in use copied from slower to faster storage temporarily
- Faster storage(cache) check first to determine if information is there
    - If it is, information used directly from the cache (fast)
    - If not, data copied to cache and used there (slow)
- Cache smaller than storage being cached
    - Cache management important design problem
    - Cache size and replacement policy (꽉 찾을 때 어떤 걸 삭제?)

<h3>Performance of Various Levels of Storage</h3>

<h3>Migration of Integer A from Disk to Register</h3>

- Multitasking environments must be careful to use most recent value, not matter where it is stored in the storage hierarchy
- Multiprocessor environment must provide cache coherency(일관성) in hardware such that all CPUs have the most recent value in their cache
- Distributed environment situation even more complex
    - Several copies of datum can exist
    - 여러 프로그램이 동일한 데이터 ..
    - 분산 처리 ..
    - 여러 PC ..

<h3>Computer System Architecture</h3>

- Single-processor systems
    - One main CPU,
    - Variety of single-processor systems: from PDAs to mainframes
- Multiprocessor Systems
    - Two or more CPUs in close communication,
    - shares the computer bus, clock, memory, and peripheral devices
    - three main advantages
        - Increased throughput
            – We can expect to get more work done in less time
        - Economy of scale
            – can cost less than equivalent multiple single-processor systems
        - Increased reliability
            – The failure of one processor will not halt the system, only slow it down.
- Multiprocessor Systems
    - One disadvantage
        - Increased complexity
            – They are also more complex in both hardware and software than
single processor systems.

    - Two types of Multiprocessor systems
        - Asymmetric multiprocessing (AMP)
            – Master-slave relationship of processor
            – Master processor schedules and allocates work to the slave processors.
            – I/O operations usually are in charge of master processor.
        - Symmetric multiprocessing (SMP)
            – No master-slave relationship between processors
            – All processors are peer to each other
            – Each processor performs its own task without interference from others.

- Clustered System
    - gather multiple systems to accomplish computational work.
    - The multiple systems are interconnected to each other via LAN.
    - Examples:
        - Web server clusters.

<h3>Operating System Structure</h3>

- Multiprogramming needed for efficiency
    - Single user cannot keep CPU and I/O devices busy at all times
    - Multiprogramming organizes jobs (code and data) so CPU always has
one to execute
    - A subset of total jobs in system is kept in memory
    - One job selected and run via job scheduling
    - When it has to wait (for I/O for example), OS switches to another job

- Timesharing (multitasking) is logical extension in which CPU
switches jobs so frequently that users can interact with each job
while it is running, creating interactive computing
    - Response time should be < 1 second
    - Each user has at least one program executing in memory process
    - If several jobs ready to run at the same time  CPU scheduling
    - If processes don’t fit in memory, swapping moves them in and out to run
    - Virtual memory allows execution of processes not completely in
memory

<h3>Memory Layout for Multiprogrammed System</h3>

-  OS keeps several jobs in memory
simultaneously.
-  Set of jobs in the memory can be a
subset of the jobs kept in the job pool.
-  OS picks and begins to execute one of
the jobs in memory

-  In I/O operation of a job, OS switches
to another job to execute.
-  When the job needs to wait, the CPU is
switched to another job, and so on.

-  Modern OS are Interrupt driven by hardware.
-  Software error or request creates exception or trap
    - Division by zero, request for operating system service
    - Other process problems include infinite loop, processes modifying each
other or the operating system

- Dual-mode operation allows OS to protect itself and other system
components
    - User mode
    - Kernel mode ( called supervisor mode, system mode, privileged mode)
    - Mode bit provided by hardware
        - provides ability to distinguish when system is running user code or
kernel code
        - Some instructions designated as privileged, only executable in kernel
mode
        - System call changes mode to kernel, return from call resets it to user

<h3>Transition from User to Kernel Mode</h3>

- At system boot time, the hardware starts in kernel mode
- The OS is then loaded and starts user applications in user mode
- Whenever a trap or interrupt occurs, the hardware switches from user
mode to kernel mode (mode bit = 0)
- Whenever the OS gains control of the computer it is kernel mode.
- The system always switches to user mode before passing control to a
user program. (mode bit =1 )

<h3>Timer | 일정한 간격으로 Interrupt 발생</h3>

- The OS maintains control over the CPU.
- The OS must prevent a user program from
    - getting stuck in an infinite loop
    - not calling system services
    - never returning control to the OS
- Timer to prevent infinite loop / process hogging resources
    - Set interrupt after specific period (fixed timer) | 일정 시간
    - Operating system decrements counter (variable timer) | 일정 개수
    - When counter zero generate an interrupt
- Before turning over control to the user, the OS ensures
that the timer is set to interrupt.
    - If the timer interrupts, control transfers automatically to the OS.

<h3>Process Management</h3>

- A process is a program in execution. It is a unit of work within the
system.
    - Program is a passive entity, process is an active entity.
- Process needs resources to accomplish its task
    - CPU, memory, I/O, files
    - Initialization data
- Process termination requires release of any reusable resources

- Single-threaded process has one program counter specifying
location of next instruction to execute
    - Process executes instructions sequentially, one at a time, until
completion
- Multi-threaded process has one program counter per thread

- 두 개 이상 함수 동시에 ..

- Typically, system has many processes, some users, some operating
system running concurrently on one or more CPUs
    - Concurrency by multiplexing the CPUs among the processes / threads

<h3>Process Management Activities</h3>

The operating system is responsible for the following
activities in connection with process management:

- Creating and deleting both user and system processes
- Suspending and resuming processes
- Providing mechanisms for process synchronization
- Providing mechanisms for process communication
- Providing mechanisms for deadlock handling

<h3>Memory Management</h3>

- All data in memory before and after processing
- All instructions in memory in order to execute

- Memory management determines what is in memory when
    - Optimizing CPU utilization and computer response to users

- Memory management activities
    - Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used
and by whom
    - Deciding which processes (or parts thereof) and data to move into
and out of memory
    - Allocating and de-allocating memory space as needed

<h3>Storage Management</h3>

- OS provides uniform, logical view of information storage
    - abstracts physical properties to logical storage unit - file & dir
    - Each medium is controlled by device driver
        - i.e., disk driver, tape driver
        - Varying properties include access speed, capacity, data-
transfer rate, access method (sequential or random)

- File-System management
    - Files usually organized into directories
    - Access control on most systems to determine who can access
what
    - OS activities include
        - Creating and deleting files and directories
        - Primitives to manipulate files and dirs (dir, type, copy, rename)
        - Mapping files onto secondary storage
        - Backup files onto stable (non-volatile) storage media

<h3>Mass-Storage Management</h3>

- Usually, disks used to store data that does not fit in main memory or
data that must be kept for a “long” period of time. (secondary storage)
- Proper management is of central importance, because
    - Entire speed of computer operation hinges on disk subsystem and its
algorithms

- OS activities
    - Free-space management
    - Storage allocation
    - Disk scheduling

- Some storage need not be fast
    - Tertiary storage includes optical storage (CD, DVD), magnetic tape
    - Still must be managed
    - Varies between WORM (write-once, read-many-times) and RW (read-write)

<h3>I/O SubSystem</h3>

- One purpose of OS is to hide peculiarities of hardware
devices from the user

    - Providing general device-driver interface

    - Providing drivers for specific hardware devices

- I/O subsystem responsible for
    - Memory management of I/O including
        - buffering (storing data temporarily while it is being transferred),
        - caching (storing parts of data in faster storage for performance),
        - spooling (the overlapping of output of one job with input of other
jobs)

<h3>Protection and Security</h3>

- Protection – any mechanism for controlling access of
processes or users to resources defined by the OS
- Security – defense of the system against internal and
external attacks
    - Huge range, including denial-of-service, worms, viruses, identity
theft, theft of service

- Security systems generally first distinguish among users,
to determine who can do what
    - User identities (user IDs, security IDs) include name and
associated number, one per user
    - User ID then associated with all files, processes of that user to
determine access control
    - Group identifier (group ID) allows set of users to be defined and
managed, then also associated with each process, file

<h3>Summary</h3>

- Three main goals of OS
    - Process Management, Environment Management, Resource Management
- Four components of Computer System
    - Hardware, OS, program, user
- OS is interrupt driven.
    - Interrupt is a request signal from hardware and software to OS.
    - Interrupt transfers control to the interrupt service routine
- I/O is data transfer in between devices and local buffer
    - device controller and device driver are involved.
    - Synchronous I/O vs. Asynchronous I/O
- Computer system has a hierarchical storage structure.
    - Register, Cache, Memory, Secondary storage, Tertiary storage
- OS provides multitasking environment which creates interactive
computing.
- Dual-mode operation allows OS to protect itself and other system
components
    - User mode, Kernel mode
- OS provides protection and security mechanism.